# 2019 Papers
## Question 1
### a: What is the main difference between a process and a thread?
The main difference between a process and a pthread is the scope. Different processes each have their own allocated memory, whereas multiple threads share the same memory. Some what related to this statement is the fact that a thread can contain multiple threads but a thread cannot contain multiple processes.
### b: Explain the operation of the following pthread library functions: pthread_mutex_lock; pthread_mutex_unlock; and pthread_cond_wait;
pthread_mutex_lock is a function to lock a mutex, what this means is that once pthread_mutex_lock is called for a given mutex by thread 1, when thread x calls the mutex lock for the same mutex it will be forced to wait until thread 1 has finished in the critical section and unlocks the mutex. 
pthread_mutex_unlock is a function to unlock a mutex that has been previously locked, following from the above example, when a mutex is locked the thread that locked the mutex can call a mutex unlock which will allow another thread to lock the mutex and operate in the critical section.
pthread_cond_wait is used to make a thread wait, it can continue operation when it receives a signal. The wait function passes a mutex and a condition object. The mutex could have been in a locked or unlocked state prior to the function call but now the mutex is unlocked. This will mean that another thread is now operating, this other thread eventually down the line will send a signal with the same condition variable and the the original thread will stop waiting.
### c: Function is_perfect returns true if a number is perfect (the sum of all its factors), with signature: int is_perfect(int n); It return 1 if n is perfect and 0 otherwise. Using this function write a multi-threaded C program to count the number of perfect numbers in the interval 1...N
```
#include <pthread.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

#define THREAD_COUNT 8
#define N 10000

pthread_t threads[THREAD_COUNT];
pthread_mutex_t lock;

int perfectCount = 0;

void * inputDivider(void * arg);

int main(){
    pthread_mutex_init(&lock);

    for(int i = 0; i < THREAD_COUNT; i++){
        int * index = (int*)malloc(sizeof(int));
        *index = i;
        int result = pthread_create(threads[i], NULL, inputDivider, (void*)index);
        if(result == -1){
            exit(1);
        }
    }

    for(int i = 0; i < THREAD_COUNT; i++){
        int result = pthread_join(threads[i], NULL);
        if (result == -1){
            exit(1);
        }
    }

    pthread_mutex_destroy(&lock);
}


void * inputDivider(void * arg){
    int index = *((int*)arg);
    int stepSize = N / THREAD_COUNT;
    int upperBounds;
    int localSum = 0;
    if(index == THREAD_COUNT - 1){
        lowerBounds = (index) * stepSize;
        upperBounds = N;
    } else {
        lowerBounds = index * stepSize;
        upperBounds = (index + 1) * stepSize;
    }
    for(int i = lowerBounds; i < upperBounds; i++){
        if(isPerfect(i) == 1){
            localSum++;
        }
    }
    pthread_mutex_lock(&lock);
    perfectCount++;
    pthread_mutex_unlock(&lock);
}

```
### d:What does the phrase embarassingly prallel or massively parallel mean in relation to a prallel program? Would you consider the program in Q1(c) above to be embarassingly parallel? Explain your answer.
Embarassingly or massively parallel is the phrase used to describe a problem that lends itself extremely well to having a multihreaded solution implemented. These problems are very often the same as above where some input data set can be split up amongst the threads and they can all perform their operations simultaneously.
## Question 2:
### a: SPIN is described as a model checker. What does that mean, precisely? Why might such a checker be useful?
When we write a concurrent program we plan how we are going to solve the problem, this plan generates a model. The high level description of what we want to implement. Without model checking we would just implement this model into the C code and if it doesn't work we don't know whether it is the fault of our model or something else in the code. We also then have the issue that the code could work 99 times out of 100 and there is one edge case that doesn't work, this will not necessarily be detected in our C program and a code with a bug might exist in the final product.
Model checking is a method of checking that our model is correct in all circumstances, when we put our model into SPIN, SPIN will try to create issues in our model and report the output to us. If we get no issues in SPIN then we know that our model is correct and we can begin our C code knowing that there are no edge cases that we have to worry about and if there is bugs we know that this is not the fault of our model.
### b: Explain the terms deadlock, livelock, starvation and fairness
Deadlock is the event where two threads are waiting for one another. This would happen in the following circumstance: if we have two threads operating in a concurrent program, both using a condition variable, one thread could begin waiting for a signal for the other thread and if the other thread reaches a wait function call before it sends a signal both threads will be waiting for eachother and it will stay this way forever unless there is other threads elsewhere.
Livelock is very similar to deadlock where it is a scenario where no progress is being made but in a livelock both of the threads are still operating. A livelock could occurr in the following circumstance, say a 
### c: SPIN has two main modes of operation -- interpretation and verification. Explain the difference between them, and the imporatance of that difference.
Interpretation is the phase where SPIN will go through all the different paths of the model and looks for an assertion violation or any other form of error such as a non progress cycle. The violations that interpretation looks for are violations that would break the rules of a concurrent system such as a deadlock. These are violations of the system rules.
Verification follows a very similar process where it will go through all the paths that the model allows and verify specifications that are written in LTL or CTL.
This difference means then when running interpretation any user defined specifications will not be taken into account. For this reason it is important to run both methods of verificatins as the interpretation is able to find errors in the model that are not specific to user defined specifications.
### d: What is the dining philosophers Problem, and why is it of such interest in the context of concurrent systems?
This will not come up in the exam
### e: Write a Promela description of a reduced version of the Dining Philosophers Problem which has two (identical) philosophers at a table for two with just two forks
This will not come up in the exam
### f: Show (with examples) how th system you describe can suffer from deadlock, livelock and/ or starvation.
This wiil not come up in the exam
## Question 3:
### a: What is the difference between a physical address and a virtaul address?
A physical address is the physical location in memory that contains a memory storage mechanism. We will very rarely interact with these types of addresses, even in assembly it is more common to use a virtual address.
A virtual address is a virtual address that representst the physical address but is used in higher level languages such as C, it can even be used in assembly alongside physical addresses. 
The purpose of adding this extra layer between the addresses is the fact that the operating system can take the virtaul address used by a program and convert this to a logical physical address for the given data. This can make programs faster as their data is kept in clusters and not scattered all of memory.
### b: Given a demand-paged virtual memory system with the following parameters:
#### Page Fault Probability (p)          |   0.000001
#### Memory access time                  |   5nS
#### Average time to reada page from disk|   10mS
#### i) Calculate the effective access time.
#### ii) What is the slowdown due to the use of demand paging (as a factor of memory access time)?
#### iii) What would the page fault probability have to be to have an overheads of less than 50% (i.e. so that the average access time would not be more than 150% of the memory access time)?

### c: Virtual memory is normally not used in applications where assured real-tim response is required. Why is that?
This is because the extra layer of abstraction which is handled by the operating system also causes some additional latency, there is also the issue that when under heavy loads the conversion to physical address may not even begin instantly so bypassing the need for this conversion is also a method of reducing the latency for real time response programs.
### d: Explain with diagrams, the operation of the scheduler in a conventional operating system. In your answer, exaplin the concept of fairness and explain how it might be managed in a scheduler
Fairness is the process of sharing computer resources and time amongst difference processes. An example of this is round-robin with Priority. I will first explain round robin. Round robin is a scheduling technique where the each process is allocated a certain amount of time in which it is allowed to operate, inside this time it can use whatever resources it wishes, however, when its quantum ends it ceases operation immediately. This will work some of the time but more often then not most processes are unimportant and not resource intensive while there are a few programs who have much more urgent need of time and resources. This is where round-robin comes in, this is an augmentation on round robin where each process is assigned a priority and the size of its quantum is based on its priority level.