# 2022
## Question 1:
### a: Different processes do not share global memroy, while different threads in a process al share that processes memory. What advantage do processes have over threads? What advantage do threads have over processes?
Processes do not share scope with one another which means that they have greater individualism which is beneficial for different programs operating simultaneously. For example you would not want shared memory between your game and a program performing a file transfer.
### b: Explain the operation of the pthread library functions: "pthread_mutex_crete" , "pthread_mutex_unlock" and "pthread_cond_join"
pthread_create is used to create a new thread and set it to perform a given function that is supplied in the function call arguments, it can also be supplied with a void pointer that can point to an address of memory that can store data that the thread may need when executing the function.
pthread_mutex_create is used to initialise a mutex correctly, this is important as it means that it will ensure that memory is allocate to the mutex, it will also ensure that the mutex is in the correct initial state. When this function is used, the code at some point should use the pthread_mutex_destory function to deallocate the memory allocate to the mutex object.
pthread_mutex_unlock is used to unlock a mutex, to explain this function we will first explain the functionality of a mutex lock. When a mutex lock function is called any other function that tries to access a mutex_lock with this same mutex variable it will be stopped and forced to wait until the original thread has finished its time in the critical section and it has called the mutex_unlock. The mutex unlock will now allow another thread to lock the mutex and enter the critical section.
pthread_cond_join does not exist.
### c: Function trapezoid computes the area of a trapezoid, for use in a numerical integration algorithm.a is the current x-value, while h is the width of the thin vertical strip whos area is being approximated. Assuming that trapezoid has been provided, as well as a function double f(double x), write a C pthreads program that uses 100 threads to numerically integrate f between 0 and 10.
```
#include <pthread.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>

#define THREAD_NUM 100

pthread_t threads[THREAD_NUM];

pthread_mutex_t lock;

int stepSize, sum;

void * tempFunc(void * arg);
double trapezoid(double a, double h);

int main(){

    pthread_mutex_create(&lock, NULL);

    stepSize = 10 / 100;

    for(int i = 0; i < 100; i++){
        int * startIndex = (int*)malloc(sizeof(int));
        *startIndex = *i;
        int result = pthread_create(threads[i], tempFunc, NULL, (void*)startIndex);
        if(result == -1){
            exit(1);
        }
    }

    for(int i = 0; i < 100; i++){
        int result = pthread_join(threads[i], NULL);
        if(result == -1){
            exit(1);
        }
    }

    pthread_mutex_destroy(&lock);
}

double trapezoid(double a, double h){
    return h*(f(a)+f(a+h))/2.0;
}

void * tempFunc(void * arg){
    int index = *(int*)arg;
    int a = index * stepSize;
    int result = trapezoid(a, stepSize);
    pthread_mutex_lock(&lock);
    sum += result;
    pthread_mutex_unlock(&lock);
    free(arg);
}
```
### d: Consider two threads running concurrently, where global is a global variable, while local is local to each thread, each of which does the following: local = global; local = local+1; global = local; Assuming that global is initialised to 0 initially, describe how the execution could result in global having a final value of 1;
It is possible that this code extract running on two different threads can result in a 1 in the following scenario: it is very possible that thread 1 and thread 2 will both read from global at the same time or in a close timeframe, for example if thread 1 reads global while thread 2 is incrementing itself in line 2 they will both read global to be equal to 0 and then when they increment this value they will both increment 1 from 0 and have a final result of 0.
## 2:
### a: Explain the concepts in Promela of statement executability and blocking using the following two Promela statements as examples: mybool = x > y; x > y; What is the effect of the above statements when they do execute?
A line of promela code is executable when the line is valid and can be executed without issue, in the above example, both of the statements will be executable in the same circumstances, if both x and y are defined then the line is valid and can be executed. However, if either x, y or both x and y are undefined the statement will not be executable and will be a blocking statement which means that the statement will not be executed until it is valid. 
The first line will make the comparison of x > y and if the statement is true it will stored a 1 in mybool and if the statement is false it will store a 0 in mybool. The second statement will perform the same operation but will not store the result of this comparison anywhere, it will simple make the comparison and throw the result away.
### b: Write a model in Promela for each of the folliwing hardware atomic instructinos: a) Test and set: read a value from memory; write 1 to that memory location b) Swap the content of two distinct memory locations. Your models should clearly show the use of any temporary storage in the CPU.
Assuming that this question does not want memory to be read and stored on the heap the following code satisfies the conditions:
```
int value = 5;


init{
    atomic{
        run P1();
    }
}

proctype P1(){
    atomic{
        int temp = value;
        printf("The value in memory was %d\n", temp);
        value = 1;
        printf("The value in memory is now %d\n", value);
    }
}
```
### c: Consider a model of a proposed solution to the mutual exclusion problem, where the part of the model that describes the critical region has the form: preamble-before-entering-critical-section; critical-stuff; postamble; Describe how adding a numeric variable plus some form of verification check can be used so that SPIN can check that only one process is ever doing critical_stuff at any one time.
A form of mutex can be implemnted by first encapsulating the whole section with an atomic block{} this will ensure that only one thread is ever operating a single instruction at a given time, now we can ensure that no two threads are operating in the critical section at the same time with a do loop. We can store a boolean variable globally that is initially set to 0 to indicate unlocked, this block would that be formatted as follows:
```
atomic{
    do
    :: lock == 0 -> lock = 1; 
                    //critical section
                    break
    :: else;
    od
    lock = 0;
}
```
### d: Model checkers are usually used to see if all desired properties hold of a model, if they find a property violation, they report an error and return a counter-example that shows a sequence of steps that leads to a property failure. GIven a model known to be correct, with a number of valid end-states, explain how to use the SPIN model-checker to generate a path through the model that leads to a given valid end-state.
Provided the model is given and written in promela we can run the program using the spin command. However, this will not garauntee give us the path to the desired end state. We can generate a path to the end state using the argument  "-t", this will generate a trail of the path taken. To cause the program to take the desired path we can add an assertion that asserts the opposite state of the desired end state, this will mean that the promela program tries to break this assertion which it will do by following the originally desired end state.
(A never statement would be more reliable than an assertion)
## 3:
### a: Explain the lifetime of a typical programme on a typical computer. What aspect of its behaviour has the most influence on the design of both hardware and operating system software?
In the first stage of the program life-cycle the program is loaded from the the SSD or HDD onto RAM. Next the program initialises itself which means allocating all required memory and setting up and data structures. Next the execution stage begins, inside the execution stage the program alternates between doing computation where there is a lot of very fast traffic between the CPU and RAM and between doing input and output operations where there is short bursts of slow raffic between the CPU and DEV. Finally there is the shutdown stage where all allocated memory is deallocated and any connections to the program such as a camera is terminated.
### b: Describe two hardware features that have been provided to facilitate the implementation of modern operating systems.
Multiple cores and/or multiple threads support for multiple programs running at once is used to facilitate modern OS as it greatly increases the speed at which the OS can operate.
Interrupts are hardware features which enable modern operating systems to respond to certain signals faster, an example of this would be a key press on a keyboard, if interrupts are implemented in the system this means that the press can be handled straight away instead of the keyboard having to be polled constantly at a specific period.
### c: Given a hard Disk with the following parameter:
### Rotational speed                    |   5400 RPM
### Seek time between adjacent tracks   |   1mS
### Average Seek Time                   |   10mS
### Sector Size                         |   512 bytes
### Sectors per Track                   |   100
### i) Explain the terms "Track", "Sector" and "Seek time" 
A track is much like a path around a disk at a constant distance from the origin, along the track there are domains that hold 1 bit of data each.
A sector is a simply a portion of a track, in this example each sector is of 512 bytes. All of the domains on the track which they contains are adjacent to one another.
Seek time is the amount of time it takes for a hard drive to locate the correct domain for a given data address, this means both spinning the disk round to the correct point in that plane but also moving further from or closer to the origin to get to the right track. 
### ii) Calculate the time to read 100kbytes if all the sectors are randomly mixed across the disk.
Average seek time = 10ms
bytes per sector 0.5kb
sectors to travel to 200
Answer = 200 x 10ms = 2000ms
### iii) Calculate the time to read 100kbytes if all the sectors are in order on two adjacent tracks
Adjacent track seek time (in order) = 1ms
Bytes per sector 0.5kb
Sector per track 100
Bytes per track = 0.5kb x 100 = 50kb
Tracks to travel = 100kb
Rotations = 100kb / 50kb = 2
Rotations per second = 5400 / 60 = 90
Transfer rate = 90 x 50kb = 4500kb
Data to be transferred = 100kb
Transfer time = (100kb / 4500kb) + (1ms x 2) = 0.024s
### d: Explain the File-system concepts of "Inode", "filename", and the distinction between "Open" and "Closed" files.
Inode (short for index node) contains the meta information about a file or directory. This allows all of the meta data to be stored in a single data structure.
A Filename is the name of a file as it appears to the user. The name of a file has to be translated from its name to the format recognised by the computer when accessing the file.
A file that is open has been accessed by a process and is currently in a readable or writeable state.
A file that is closed is not being accessed by a process currently and is not currently in a readable or writeable state.