# 2023 paper
## Question 1:
### a: How do processes differ from threads in typical UNIX-like operating systems? What advantage do processes have over threads? What advantage do threads have over processes.
The major difference is the seperation between threads and the seperation between threads. If you have multiple threads in a program these threads all share the same shared memory, whereas processes do not share memory, they are each allocated the memory that they require and they can not write other another. Another difference is that a process can have multiple threads inside it but a thread cannot have multiple processes inside of it.
The disctinction of a shared and individual scope can be both an advantage and disadvantage for both. For processes the isolated scopes enable different proceses to not have to worry about overwritting eachothers memory, however on the other side the shared scope that threads possess mean that they can work together to perform larger operations much more simply.
An advantage exclusive to threads is that they are much more lightweight than processes.
### b: Explain the operation of the pthread library functions: pthread_join, pthead_mutex_lock and pthread_cond_wait:
Pthread_join is used to join two threads back together, more often than not the first argument is a thread and the second argument is NULL, this will wait for the thread to cease operation and the thread will then be terminated, however, it is also possible to pass a second thread as the second argument, this will cause both of the threads to join together.
Pthread_mutex_lock is used to lock a mutex. The functionality of this can be explained as follows: When thread 1 begins execution it may call the lock, then it will begin executing in the critical section, while this is happening thread 2 may be just behind thread 1 and tries to lock the mutex itself. However, since the mutex is lock the thread will wait here until the thread is unlocked and then it will take its turn entering the critical section. Once thread 1 has exited it will unlock the mutex.
Pthread_cond_wait is used in conjuction with both a mutex object and a condition object. The state of the mutex prior to the call of condition wait can be either locked or unlocked, when the function has been called however, the mutex will be locked and the thread that called the wait will cease operation and wait for a signal with the condition variable. After the wait has been called thread 2 will continue operation whether it was locked or not beforehand by the mutex, it should then eventually call the signal with the corresponding condition variable, if it does not call this function starvation or deadlock will occur.
### c: The average of a list of n numbers x1, ..... xi, .....xn is given by x hat = sumof(x (from 1 to n))/n. Given n = 600000, and the xi and C double stored in an array of that size, write a C pthreads program that uses 6 threads to compute the average, storing the result in a global variable called average.
```
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <pthread.h>

#define SAMPLES = 600000
#define THREAD_NUM = 6

pthread_mutex_t lock;
pthread_t threads[THREAD_NUM];

double average = 0;
double inputData[SAMPLES];

void * getAverageSegment(void * arg);

int main(){

    pthread_mutex_init(&lock);

    for(int i = 0; i < THREAD_NUM; i++){
        int * index = (int*)malloc(sizeof(int));
        *index = i;
        int result = pthread_create(NULL, threads[i], NULL, (void*)index);
        if (result == -1){
            exit(1);
        }
    }

    for(int i = 0; i < THREAD_NUM; i++){
        int result = pthread_join(threads[i], NULL);
        if (result == -1){
            exit(1);
        }
    }

    printf("The final output for average is %f", average);

    pthread_mutex_destroy(&lock);
}

void * getAverageSegment(void * arg){
    int index = *((int*)arg);
    double localSum = 0;
    for(int i = 0; i < (index * (SAMPLES/THREAD_NUM)); i++){
        localSum += inputData[i];
    }
    free(arg);
    localSum = localSum / (SAMPLES/THREAD_NUM);
    double weightedAverage = localSum / THREAD_NUM;
    pthread_mutex_lock(&lock);
    average += weightedAverage;
    pthread_mutex_unlock(&lock);
}
```
### d: Consider two threads running concurrently, where global is a global variable, each thread has a local variable called local, each of which executes the following code: local = global; local = local - 10; global = local; Assuming that global is initialised to 100 initially, describe how the execution could result in global having a final value of 90
If two threads are operating concurrently, the result will only be 80 if one thread performs all 3 operations before the other thread even reads the global variable. To explain this I will demonstrate a counter example where the final example is 90, First thread 1 reads the value from global, next thread 1 decrements the local variable, next thread two reads value from global. At this point in time both threads read the global variable value to be 100 meaning when each of them subtract 10 from the 100 and store it back into global both of them will be storing the same 90 despite the operation having been performed twice.
## 2: 
### a: Explain the concepts of statement executability and blocking in Promela, using the following two statements as examples: ok = hi > lo; hi > lo; Your asnwer should explain how each of the above statements change the model state when they do execute.
In Promela a statement is only executable when all of the variables or values used in the line are defined, this means that the statement can be executed and the program will move past the line. In promela when some of the variables used are undefined the program will be blocked at this line until the values become defined. In the above examples, both of these statements will block if either hi or lo is undefined. Once both are defined both statements will execute. When these statements execute, the top line will store the boolean result of the comparison inside ok, while the bottom line will make the comparison and then just throw away the result.
### b: Write a model in promela for the following hardware atomic instruction, known as Compare-and-Swap: it compares a CPU register reg to a first memory location mem1, storing the result in another register variable res; if they are the same then it overwrites mem1 with the contents of another memory location mem2; if they are not the same, then it loads mem1 into register reg. Your models should clearly show the use of any temporary storage in the CPU.
```
int value = 5;


init{
    atomic{
        run P1();
    }
}

proctype P1(){
    atomic{
        int temp = value;
        printf("The value in memory was %d\n", temp);
        value = 1;
        printf("The value in memory is now %d\n", value);
    }
}
```
### c: Consider a model of a proposed solution to the mutual exclusion problem, where the critical region can be viewed for simplicity as the following Promela statement. critical_stuff; Describe how to add a variable and extra statements involving that variables that check that at most one process is ever doing critical_stuff at any one time:
The mutual exclusion problem can be solved as follows: Say we have two processes operating, process 1 and process 2. We can first ensure that only one process at a time is performing a line of code using the atomic instruction, then we can create a do loop where a boolean value is checked, if the boolean value is high then a process cannot enter the critical section and will have to wait for another proccess to finish in the critical section. Once one of the processes leaves the critical section they set the boolean value to be 0 to indicate that the lock is no longer active, this will enable another process to set the lock high and then enter the critical section. The described code can be created as below:
```
bool mutex = 0;
int whileCounter = 0;

init{
    atomic{
        do
        ::  whileCounter < 100 ->   run P1();
                                    whileCounter ++;
        ::  else ->                 break;
        od;
    }
}

proctype P1(){
    assert(mutex == 0 || mutex == 1);
    atomic{
        do
        :: mutex == 0 ->    mutex = mutex + 1; 
                            printf("Mutex Locked\n");
                            //Critical_stuff;
                            break;
        :: else;
        od
        mutex = 0;
        printf("Mutex unLocked\n");
    }
}
```
### d: Promela, like C, allow "labels" to be attached to statements. These can then be used as targets for the goto statements. In addition, labels with certain prefixes have special meaning for the spin model-checker. What properties are meant to be verified using: i) Labels that begin with end? ii) labels that begin with progess?
An end label is used to define an end point to a given process. It may have a print statement after it is called to indicate that the process is ending but it should not contain any functional code.
A progress label is used to mark points along the code where progress has been made, this is useful for debugging certain errors with the model which can be useful for debugging livelocks.
## Question 4:
### a: Explain the lifetime of a typical programme running on a typical computer. What aspect of its behaviour has had the most influence on the design of both hardware and operating system software.
At the beginning of a programmes lifetime the programme is loaded from the SSD or HDD is loaded onto RAM. The next phase involves resource allocation for the program and memory allocation for data structures. Now the execution phase of the program which alternates between two states, one of which is computation, this is where the CPU is working hard to do the complex interactions of the program, the other state is the input and output states, this is a slow state where the CPU is not as active. Finally when the program is ending, all of the resources that were allocated are deallocated and the program is terminated.
### b: Describe two hardware features that have been provided to facilitate the implementation of modern operating systems.
One hardware feature that supports modern opearting systems is the multicore / multithreaded CPU. This allows for multiple programs and processes to operate simultaneously and can hugely increase the speed at which an OS can operate.
A second hardware feature is interrupts, with interrupts when an action is performed it does not need to wait for the next poll cycle but can interrupt the CPU to have it perform the appropriate action. An example of this is a hardware interrupt from a button press on button connected to a GPIO pin on a raspberry pi pico.
### c: Given a hard disk with the following parameters: 
### Rotational Speed                    |   7200 RPM
### Seek time between adjacent tracks   |   0.5ms
### Average seek time                   |   8ms
### Sector size                         |   1kB
### Sectors per track                   |   100
### i) Explain the terms "Track", "Relational Delay" and "seek Time"
A track on a hard drive is a circle around the origin where each point on the circle is a constant distance from the origin. Inside a track there a multiple sectors that each store multiple bits.
Rotational Delay is the time it takes for the disk to rotate around to the desired point on the hard disk when discounting the required time to settle. The track is also irrelevant in this context.
Seek time is the total time to rotate the disk to the correct point and also change to the correct track and then settle at the correct domain.
### ii) Calculate the time to read 1000 sectors if all the sectors are randomly mixed across the disk.
### iii) Calculate the time to read 1000 sectors if all the sectors are in order on ten adjacent tracks.
Rotations per second = 7200 / 60 = 120
Time per rotation = 1 / 120 seconds
Tracks to read = 1000 / 100 = 10
Time for rotations = 10 * (1 / 120) = 1/12 seconds
Time for track changes = 0.5 * 10 = 0.005 seconds
### d: Explain the file-system concepts of "inode", "Directory", and the distinction between 'open" and "Closed" files, with an emphasis on the relevant data-structures.
An inode stores the meta information about the file directory, this contains info such as size and permissions. This is useful as the information about a directory can be stored individually seperate from the directory itself.
A directory is from a higher level perspective a folder in which files or additional directories can be stored. In a low level perspective it is a memory address with a given amount of space allocated after it in which other data can be stored.
An open file is a file that has been accessed by a programme and its contents are currently readable and writeable for this programme. 
A closed file is a file that has not been accesses by a programme and its contents are not currently readable and writeable.